Semantic Conventions - Multi-Registry Proposal (#348)
open-telemetry/weaver: docs/specs/multi-registry/multi_registry.md

      integration for complex systems.
    - By creating internal registries, enterprises can define custom signals that align with their specific
      needs and share these across teams and products, fostering internal consistency. This capability enhances
      collaboration and streamlines the observability practices within the organization.

By supporting these actors and their specific use cases, the multi-registry approach enables a flexible,
community-driven model for defining and using semantic conventions across diverse domains and applications.

## Design Principles

- **Independent Ownership**: Individuals or organizations should be able to create and maintain a registry
  independently, without requiring coordination with the OTEL project.
- **Registry Accessibility**: Registries should be either private or public, allowing flexibility based on
  the needs of the owner. Registries should be accessible via a URL.
- **Common Format**: A published registry should adhere to a common packaging and format, making it easy to
  consume and integrate with other registries.

> - **Self-Contained**: A published registry should be self-contained and stored in a single file.

Reviewer: agree with-self-contained, but single file sounds weird as a design principle

Author: The idea was to make a published registry simple to consume, so in addition to being self-contained, having a single file also simplifies consumption. I’m going to remove the “single file” aspect from the design principles section for now, but I will continue to use the single file approach for the published registry in this proposal and see how things evolve.

- **Version Discoverability**: The various versions of a registry should be discoverable and accessible via a
  URL.
- **Community Support Tools**: The OTEL project should provide and maintain an extensible tool, Weaver, to
  assist the community in creating, validating, resolving, packaging, and publishing registries. Weaver should
  also support documentation generation and code generation for any registry.
- **Core Policy Enforcement**: The OTEL project should establish and enforce a set of core policies (e.g.,
  backward compatibility policies) that all registries must adhere to, ensuring consistency and reliability.
  These policies should be enforced by Weaver.
- **Cross-Registry References**: References between different registries should be supported, facilitating
  interoperability and integration across various registries.

> - **Conflict Avoidance through Scoping**: A scoping mechanism should be implemented to ensure that a signal

Reviewer: I'd like to understand what scoping means. 

There should not be a case when two attributes with the same name are defined within one  schema_url. 

If scoping means that both exist but you can specify which one is imported, than this information is not available to the consumer of this telemetry.

Author: To make things clear, the consumer of telemetry, i.e., anyone downstream from signal production (backend, dashboard, etc.), will not see this type of conflict and will see the attribute or signal with its name as defined today. I will add this principle to the design principles.

I am currently writing an entire section on conflict resolution. Conflicts can arise for several reasons. Examples:
- A registry that imports two registries, which in turn import a registry but in different versions.
- A registry that imports two registries, which in turn import the same registry but apply different overrides.

Things should be better defined soon.

Author: I added the following item in the design principles list:
- **Transparency for Telemetry Consumers**: The downstream consumers of telemetry data, such as backends and dashboards, should never be exposed to conflicts within or between registries. They should see attributes and signals as they are defined, without any scope or conflict resolution directives, ensuring a consistent and reliable data experience.

  management of dependencies, as updating to a new registry version will only require a single change in the
  registry file containing the global aliases. Weaver will report an error if an alias not defined locally or as
  a global alias is used in a semconv file.

#### Do we allow importing the same registry with different versions?
- Short answer: No for consistency.
- Long answer: Although technically it is possible to support multiple versions of an imported registry, it is a
  good practice to align the versions inside the same registry. This practice make the overall registry more
  consistent and easy to reason about. Weaver will report an error if different versions are used for the same
  registry in the scope of a single registry.

#### Do we allow reference of experimental entities across registries?
- Short answer: No for backward compatibility.
- Long answer: Experimental entities are not meant to be used in production. Experimental entities are subject to
  change or removal without any notice in the next version of the registry. The type of an experimental entity can

>   be changed. Weaver will detect and report an error if an experimental entity is referenced across registries.

Reviewer: I don't understand this limitation or reasoning behind it.

It's common to use experimental semconv in production, it's also common to implement them in OTel or outside it in the instrumentations.

It makes sense to require something that depends on experimental stuff to be experimental, but I don't understand why we should limit the ability to import experimental attribute/group.

Author: The approach was to support only the most essential/simple features at the beginning, with the option of adding such things later if the need arose. It seems that the need is already here :-)

Technically, I don’t think there’s a problem with supporting experimental definitions across registries. Even if we decide that this is supported by default, I believe we should, at a minimum, make it easier for users who don’t want to allow this. This could simply be implemented as an OTEL policy that prevents this type of dependency.

Author: The last proposal doesn't have this limitation.

#### Do we allow circular references between registries?
- Short answer: No.
- Long answer: Circular references are already prohibited inside a registry, so circular references between
  registries can lead to the kind of problems (e.g. unresolvable references). Weaver will detect and report
  an error if a circular reference is detected between registries.

#### Do we allow references to groups or attributes defined in an imported registry?
- Short answer: Yes.
- Long answer: References to groups or attributes defined in an imported registry are allowed. This feature
  allows a registry to extend or override the attributes of an imported group. Weaver will detect and report an
  error if a reference is made to an entity that is not defined in the imported registry.

### Open Questions:

> - Can we override any field of a group defined in an imported registry? No for `type` field, what about the other

Reviewer: I'd start with the same limitations as within the registry. You can't change type, stability, deprecation status. Can change anything else.

Author: Thanks

Author: Done.

  fields?

> - Is there a relationship to define between the instrumentation scope name and version and the registry?

Reviewer: instrumentation scope is a random string - name of the library/class/component that produced the telemetry, I can change which component/class emits my logs/events, but this should have no effect on the consumer of the telemetry.

I think we might change it at some point, but that's the current state of affairs.

Author: Made some clarifications in the proposal and removed these specific open questions.

## Core Policies

These core policies aim to ensure consistency and backward compatibility across registries.

### Group Policies
- No group ID collisions
- Only attribute groups are allowed in the attribute registry

> - Ref attributes are not allowed in the attribute registry

Reviewer: I think we need a more formal attribute registry definition than the current one - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1269

- Stable attributes cannot change type
- All attributes must be defined inside a semantic convention registry
- Attribute names must match the following regular expression: `^[a-z][a-z0-9]*([._][a-z0-9]+)*$`
- Attributes with prefixes are not allowed; attributes must be fully qualified

### Enum Member Policies
- Stable members cannot change stability
- Values cannot change
- IDs cannot be removed
- Enum IDs must match the following regular expression: `^[a-z][a-z0-9]*([._][a-z0-9]+)*$`

### Metrics
- No metric name collisions
- Metrics cannot be removed
- Metrics cannot "degrade" in stability (e.g., stable -> experimental)
- Stable metric units cannot change
- Stable metric instruments cannot change
- The set of required/recommended attributes must remain the same
- Metric names must match the following regular expression: `^[a-z][a-z0-9]*([._][a-z0-9]+)*$`

### Events
- No event name collisions
- Events cannot be removed
- Events cannot "degrade" in stability (e.g., stable -> experimental)
- The set of required/recommended attributes must remain the same
- Event names must match the following regular expression: `^[a-z][a-z0-9]*([._][a-z0-9]+)*$`

### Spans

> - No span name collisions

Reviewer: I think we need to find a better identity parameter for spans than name. Span names is an existing thing - they are usually something like "GET /users/{user-id}" or `SELECT public.my-shop-db` - they are human-friendly summary of what this span represents and are part of the exported telemetry.

Author: I agree. However, for symmetry with other signal types, we should ideally keep `name` to identify things, as we do with attributes and metrics, and use a separate identifier for the human-friendly summary of what this span represents.

Reviewer: Span name is used everywhere - in the spec - https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#span-creation, ion all semantic conventions. I don't think we can change how span name property is called - it'll be a huge source of confusion.

> - Spans cannot be removed

Reviewer: why not? what does it even mean to remove a span?

I assume I pick the spans that I want to support by referencing them and I should be free to drop any spans that I don't need.

Moreover, if I'm defining semconv for a specific system (e.g. Kafka library), not all spans declared in generic conventions apply to my library, some of them are defined for scenarios that I don't support and it'd be best if I don't ever mention corresponding spans in my conventions.

Author: In the OTEL registry, once a span has been defined, can its definition be removed in a later version? I thought this wasn't allowed if the span had a stability status set to `stable`. If that's the case, I think we should apply the same rule for all registries, whether OTEL or not.

Reviewer: Let's say I work on a library that supports multiple protocols (HTTP and something else). At some point my library removes support for one of these protocols. I should be allowed to stop referencing corresponding protocol spans - I no longer report them.

For metrics, for example, we at least support informal requirement levels and we could say that if you report e.g. http metrics, you must at least report at least required ones. Even this is tough to say - how do you know that they are going to report HTTP metrics if they don't reference them?

For spans it's even more complicated since span identity is not defined and spans don't have requirement levels. 
We don't define anything about spans in yaml beyond what's defined for the attribute_groups - we need to change this first.

----------

I think there are two separate discussions here:
1. What's allowed when I reference conventions from registry A in registry B (or within one registry). 
2. What changes are allowed in the the registry B from version N to N+1

I'm mostly talking about p1 (you can reference or not reference any group), and I think you're talking about p2. 

Maybe it'd be more clear if policies were separated into two groups: within-one-version and backward-compatibility?

> - Spans cannot "degrade" in stability (e.g., stable -> experimental)

Reviewer: I think this should be reversed.

E.g. I'm adding semconv for Azure messaging library based on stable generic semconv (they are not stable yet, but let's assume they are).

My customizations to generic messaging spans and metrics are experimental, core conventions are stable. Why is it not allowed?

However I should not be able to define stable conventions based on generic experimental ones - this would lead to breaking changes.

Author: I agree, that should be allowed, and I will make the change.

Author: Reference experimental entities is now allowed by default.

> - The set of required/recommended attributes must remain the same

Reviewer: I think we need to come up with more nuanced rules. E.g.
- it's ok to change recommended attribute to required. 
- it's ok to remove recommended (if you have good reasons not to populate recommended, this is your way to tell that you don't populate it) 
- it's ok to change conditionally required to recommended or required (if condition is always true)
- it might be ok to promote opt-in to recommended or even required

maybe those rules are complex enough that we just want to start with a simple one that all required attributes should stay required but some new ones may be added

Author: Added your comment in the spec for discussion

Reviewer 2: +1 to starting with a simple rule (about required).

as a case in point, when the metric instrument is a monotonic counter there are very few problems associated with optional attributes: some systems will be OK, some will not. could an 3rd party library registry declare recommended attributes on a metric (say, with a configuration to enable/disable) and then an application registry pin down which attributes will or will not be used (e.g., by not enabling the choice in the 3rd party library)? that makes sense to me.

> - Span names must match the following regular expression: `^[a-z][a-z0-9]*([._][a-z0-9]+)*$`

Reviewer: see my comment above - span name is pre-existing thing with different rules (unicode string)

  is imported with different aliases. Detect when an alias (global or local) is not used in the registry.
- More TBD.

Open Questions: 
- Is a resolved registry contain any trace of the imported registries?
- It will be nice to detect when a new registry version is available. How can we detect the presence of a new registry
  version? A file containing of the schema URL per version for a registry? Some kind of naming conventions for the URL? 

## Protocol Changes

No impact on OTLP and OTAP. 

A `schema_url` field is already present at the resource and scope levels. 

Ideally any component of the observability pipeline should be able to fetch the resolved registry just by knowing the
schema URL of any resource or instrumentation scope. 

## OTEL SDKs Changes

TBD

Open Questions:

- Can we enforce the presence of the schema URL in the resource and instrumentation scope?
- How do we convey the schema URL to the SDKs? Could that be part of the codegen done by Weaver?

## Resolved Semantic Convention Registry Format

> Note: A resolved registry is self-contained and does not include any complex constructs

> > like `imports`, `ref`, `extends`, etc. Their **structure is less subject to change**, making them good

Reviewer: if I'm defining a span or a metric, I have to reference some attribute and maybe extend some attribute group, so this may need clarification.

> candidates for publication and easier to consume.

The following properties are proposed for a resolved registry:

- Resolved registry must be easy to consume and to publish
  - Accessible via a URL.
  - Self-contained, i.e. a single file.
  - No `ref`, no `extends`, no `imports`, no alias, no other complex constructs.

>   - Yaml or JSON format so resolved registries can be easily consumed by any tool.

Reviewer: nitpicking: I think single file and this point are mutually exclusive - I get some warnings from VSCode on resolved attribute registry alone due to its size.

more complex inheritance mechanisms, etc. The resolved registry format will not change because all these complex
constructs will be removed during the resolution process. This property makes resolved registries good candidates
for publication and easier to consume.

The content of a resolved registry depends on the:
- The semantic convention files composing the registry to resolve.
- The registries imported.
- The configuration specified during the resolution process.
  - Include all the entities of the imported registries
  - Include only the referenced entities of the imported registries.

More specifically, a resolved registry contains:
- All the attributes registry specified locally in the registry.
- All the groups specified locally in the registry.
- All the attributes and groups imported but not re-exported locally are not included in the resolved registry. A
  re-exported entity is an entity that is imported and referenced in the local registry with some overriding.

Open Questions:

- Do we keep track of the imported registries in the resolved registry? If yes, how? Lineage?

> - Can we leverage the attribute deduplication mechanism to simplify the merging of imported registries? ToDo -> Explain

Reviewer: can we start by disallowing attribute/span/event/metric duplication and only add it along with scoping only if there is actual demand?

Author: The next version of this document includes a complete revision of the resolution process and eliminates the need for scoping in the most common cases. I think the best approach at this stage is to postpone the discussion on scoping.

  attribute deduplication mechanism.
- Can we extend the deduplication mechanism to the signals? 
- Materialized resolved registry (what see the jq, template and policy engines) vs Published resolved registry.
  - Materialized Resolved Registry: This is what the jq, template and policy engines see. In this format there are
  no deduplication of declaration. This format is not meant to be published.
  - Published Resolved Registry: In this format, the deduplication of declaration is automatically done by Weaver. 
  This format is meant to be published.

## Priorities

TBD

## General Open Questions

- What about introducing a new type of semconv file that will let end-users define global overrides and global redact
  directives? For example, the requirement level of attributes such as `client.address` or `server.address` will be

>   better defined by the end-user than by the library author, or a vendor. A similar approach could be used for redact

Reviewer: future concern: we should be crystal clear that user modifying requirement level in their registry has no effect on instrumentation libraries or produced telemetry.

Author: Yes, in a general context. I will add this point to the document. However, I also believe that Weaver can enable the development of a new type of type-safe Client SDK, where a change in the `requirement_level` would have a direct impact on what is reported by the applications using this SDK. Personally, I am a strong believer in this approach.

Reviewer: I love the idea, but it needs all instrumentation libraries to change. 

I.e. if my library reports `http.request.header.foo` as opt-in (or doesn't report it at all), it's not in the OTel SDK power to make my instrumentation report it.

Author: I don’t think we need to change anything in the current instrumentation libraries. In my view, we can follow a two-step approach. The first step involves proposing a library that offers a type-safe API on top of the existing SDK clients. Those who prefer the current approach can continue using the current SDK client as they always have. Those who want the pure type-safe API approach will only interact with this additional layer. It is even conceivable that a user might want to adopt a mixed approach, using one or the other APIs depending on the need.

In step 2, the idea is to no longer base the type-safe API on the SDK clients, but to provide a fully optimized version by taking advantage of the fact that a type-safe API doesn’t need all the overhead of a generic approach. Hashmaps, abstraction layers, etc., can either be optimized or completely removed.

The advantage of this two-step approach is that we can test the type-safe API approach with the community at a lower cost. I already have a proof of concept for step 1 in Rust.

signals that align with their specific needs and share these across teams and products.

The effect of combining semantic conventions, multiple registries, and Weaver is illustrated in the diagram below.

![Semantic Convention Registries + Weaver = Open Ecosystem](images/otel-semconv-open-ecosystem.svg)

This proposal outlines the changes required to support multiple semantic convention registries in OpenTelemetry, including
the core policies that all registries must adhere to, the format of published registries, and the modifications needed
in Weaver to support the creation, validation, generation, packaging, and publication of registries.

> [!NOTE]
> This proposal describes the overall changes required to achieve the multi-registry vision long term. However, these
> changes can be introduced incrementally. For example, we could start by supporting attributes only and gradually add
> support for metrics, events, spans, etc.

> [!NOTE]
> In this document, “semantic convention registry” refers to a collection of semantic convention entities (attributes,
> groups, signals, etc.) that define the semantics of the data model used in OpenTelemetry. The terms “registry” and

> > “semantic convention registry” are used interchangeably. The term “entity” refers to any semantic convention

Reviewer 3: Nit: "Entity" may have overlap in name in OpenTelemetry. I can't think of a better term just yet, but we may need one.

Author: I understand. Should I use `telemetry object` instead of entity?

Author: Replaced all references to entit(y|ies) with telemetry object(s).

  also support documentation and code generation for any published registry.
- **Clear, Actionable, and Educational Error Messages**: Weaver should detect and report any errors or inconsistencies
  in a registry, providing users with clear and actionable feedback.

## Semantic Convention Registry Changes

The following sections describe the changes needed in the semantic convention registry to support multiple registries.

### Directory Structure

The directory structure of a registry remains mostly unchanged, with the addition of a new file called
`weaver_registry.yaml`. This file contains the registry metadata, such as the name, version, and description.
It is required for published registries or registries with dependencies on other registries.

```plaintext
registry_root/
  domain_1/
  domain_2/
  ...
  resources/
  weaver_registry.yaml
```

### `weaver_registry.yaml` File

This file is used to describe the registry and its dependencies. It is optional for standalone registries
but required for published registries or registries with dependencies on other registries.

```yaml
name: <registry_name>
description: <registry_description>

> version: <registry_version>

Reviewer 3: One concern I have here is the same I have, e.g. with cargo crate versions.

What does CI/CD look like?  My ideal is releasing a version is as close to `git tag <version>` as possible.  

This is a bit of a nit, but also a foundational question - What does release and maintenance of these look like?  Should version be external, but everything else be in this file?

Author: Here’s the English version of your text:

Using `git tag <version>` and not defining the version number in the YAML file is fine with me, as long as we can maintain the self-contained aspect of the artifact that will be downloadable by the users of the corresponding registry. This artifact could be hosted on a GitHub repo, a simple web server, or a CDN. In the end, Weaver should be able to retrieve the version either from the content, the file name, headers, etc. So, I feel like we’ll need a bit more than just a `git tag <version>`. Any suggestions to achieve something like this are welcome.

Reviewer 3: Yes - I'm fine if `git tag <version>` kicks off a workflow that fills out this version, just want to make sure we keep it flexible so we can do that. I agree there needs to be a final file that has the version filled out.  I just want to make sure that's a "produced" artifact not an "input source" requiement.

Author: I have added the following note in the proposal.

> The way this version number for the registry is managed and injected into the manifest file is still up for
> discussion. For example, it could be part of a workflow triggered by a simple git tag <version> or any similar
> mechanism.

maintainers:
  - name: <name>
    email: <optional email>
    url: <optional url>
dependencies:
  - name: <registry_name>
    version: <registry_version | latest>
    repository: <url_of_repository_where_registry_versions_are_published>
    alias: <optional alias>
configuration:
  allow_experimental_ref: <true|false>  # default value to be discussed
```

A registry can import one or more semantic conventions from other published registries. These dependencies
are declared in the `dependencies` section. The `alias` field is optional but must be specified
if multiple imported registries share the same `name`. 

Based on the `dependencies` section, Weaver can automatically update dependencies to the latest version when a new
version becomes available (see the [Registry Update](#registry-update) section). It also allows registry authors to use
registry names as preferred, without concerns about conflicts.

Sections such as [Registry Resolution](#registry-resolution), [Registry Packaging](#registry-packaging), and 
[Registry Publication](#registry-publication) provide more details on how the `weaver_registry.yaml` file
is used in these processes.

Open Questions:

> - Should we follow SemVer 2 for registry versions? It seems advisable, as Weaver can detect breaking changes. However,

Reviewer 3: This is something we likely need to discuss on the specification itself. cc @tigrannajaryan.

I do think we should just adopt semconv as it alleviates a lot of problems with a path forward for handling them, all while keeping the versioning "simple".

Reviewer 4: I don't think that we should force semconv on all repositories.  I think it's a good thing to follow for the otel repositories but might not be appropriate everywhere.

I think automatically upgrading to newer versions might be a bad idea in general.  If I pinned to a specific version getting a newer version will eventually lead to unexpected results.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I meant semver

Author: @jsuereth I agree. We should use SemVer for OTel but not strictly adhere to all semantic versioning rules. We could simply define an order relation between versions (e.g., 1.2.0 > 1.1.15 > 0.9.32), which would be sufficient to determine if one registry is newer than another.

@MadVikingGod Regarding the automatic upgrade, to clarify, I’m not suggesting automatically upgrading registry versions. Instead, I’m proposing a command that allows the user to explicitly choose whether to automatically upgrade registry versions, so it’s done in a controlled manner.

Author: @jsuereth I updated the proposal as follow.

The resolution process for supporting multiple registries does not rely specifically on semantic versioning SemVer 2 (we rely on the concept of mergeable telemetry objects sharing a common ancestor). However, it is entirely acceptable and supported for registry authors to adopt this convention if they wish to do so.

  imported group.
- The structure of a reference must be enhanced to disambiguate attribute or signal references from other registries
  when necessary (more details in the [Registry Resolution](#registry-resolution) section).

Currently, a reference follows dot notation (e.g., `ref: client.address`). When there is no ambiguity or conflict
detected by Weaver, this notation is sufficient. However, when a conflict occurs, the user must disambiguate the
reference by prefixing it with the registry name (e.g., `ref: otel:client.address`). The prefix corresponds
to the registry name as defined in the `weaver_registry.yaml` file under the `dependencies` section. A colon is used
as a separator between the name and the attribute or group name. References to groups or attributes defined in the
local registry are never prefixed.

In a group, the `extends` section can now reference an imported group using this new reference syntax. Similarly, the
`attributes` section of a group can reference an imported attribute.

In the current semantic conventions specification, referencing a group is currently unsupported. Uniqueness within

> groups is scoped by the type of group. It is entirely possible to have an event and a metric identified by the same ID.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should fix this first -  This is something we could do BEFORE allowing multiple registries and I think would make our lives better overall.

cc @lmolkova for thoughts on that.

Reviewer: @jsuereth I think it's a feature, not a bug - https://github.com/open-telemetry/weaver/pull/348#discussion_r1742858393

E.g. `http.request.body.size` can in theory be an attribute and a metric name. Or `messaging.message.time_in_queue`. 

I don't believe we have real examples of this but there were some discussions in [the past](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/32486#discussion_r1575584907) where it would make sense to use the same attribute name on an event/span as some existing metric name.

It could be a good feature for spans/events->metrics pipeline (take specific attribute and convert it to metric) and I'd like to check if we can keep this door open.

Reviewer: >  It is entirely possible to have an event and a metric identified by the same ID.

I think it's no longer the case - we have unique group ids enforced across signals. So perhaps this discussion can be resolved?

Author: @lmolkova I removed the part mentioning the possible lack of uniqueness between different types of signals. However, we still have an issue when a registry wants to extend the `attribute_group` of another registry. The `attribute_group` ID, I believe, is unique within a specific version of the registry. However, group IDs, in general, are not truly persistent across registry versions, unlike the `name` fields (used for the signals). I added a note in the proposal to keep track of this. Please let me know if you disagree.

under `dependencies` are loaded, parsed, and passed to the conflict resolution stage (assuming that any published
registries have already completed their resolution process). The dependencies of registries form a directed acyclic
graph. Each registry may be maintained by different owners and have different release schedules, which can introduce
conflicts, particularly when dependencies import different versions of a common ancestor or independently override
entities defined in the same ancestor registry.

The resolution process is designed to automatically detect and resolve most conflicts without user intervention.
However, when a conflict cannot be resolved consistently and predictably, the user must disambiguate by explicitly
choosing the imported registry to resolve the conflict.

The process hinges on the concept of mergeable entities (attributes or groups). For two entities to be considered
mergeable, they must, at least, meet the following basic criteria:
1. Both entities must be of the same type (e.g., attribute, metric, event, span, etc.).
2. They must share the same ID.
3. They must have a common ancestor (i.e., both were originally defined in the same registry).

> Since entities are complex objects consisting of multiple fields, and override mechanisms are allowed, one of the

Reviewer 3: I like this definition - but we should think about debuggability / o11y of these scenarios.  I may just need to read further, but how are you planning to call out / report these issues to users?

Author: There are several elements throughout the document related to debuggability, but I consolidated the key points by adding two new paragraphs in the “Registry Resolution” section to summarize the ideas. See changes in [58d4f9d](https://github.com/open-telemetry/weaver/pull/348/commits/58d4f9d774b86b7be31157a2be80412d94731dd0)

  defined, without scope or conflict resolution directives, ensuring a consistent and reliable data experience.
- **Community Support Tools**: The OTEL project should provide and maintain an extensible tool, Weaver, to
  assist the community in creating, validating, resolving, packaging, and publishing registries. Weaver should
  also support documentation and code generation for any published registry.
- **Clear, Actionable, and Educational Error Messages**: Weaver should detect and report any errors or inconsistencies
  in a registry, providing users with clear and actionable feedback.

## Semantic Convention Registry Changes

The following sections describe the changes needed in the semantic convention registry to support multiple registries.

### Directory Structure

The directory structure of a registry remains mostly unchanged, with the addition of a new file called
`weaver_registry.yaml`. This file contains the registry metadata, such as the name, version, and description.
It is required for published registries or registries with dependencies on other registries.

```plaintext
registry_root/
  domain_1/
  domain_2/
  ...
  resources/
  weaver_registry.yaml
```

> ### `weaver_registry.yaml` File

Reviewer: I think we should decide if/how it aligns with the 3-file-schema-approach we discussed in semconv tooling call:

* 3 files  
  * Existing file \- marker  
    * contains pointer to diff  
    * contains pointer to def  
  * Model file  
     * Contains the full set of defined semantic conventions for that version  
  * Migration file  
     * Contains transformations you can use to keep version compatible \*when they are non breaking differences\*  
      * Should be cohesive/stand-alone for transformation use case.

There seem to be a lot of intersection with what'd we put into the 2.0 of `schema.yaml` and we should figure out if we need another one for registry manifest.

detected by Weaver, this notation is sufficient. However, when a conflict occurs, the user must disambiguate the
reference by prefixing it with the registry name (e.g., `ref: otel:client.address`). The prefix corresponds
to the registry name as defined in the `weaver_registry.yaml` file under the `dependencies` section. A colon is used
as a separator between the name and the attribute or group name. References to groups or attributes defined in the
local registry are never prefixed.

In a group, the `extends` section can now reference an imported group using this new reference syntax. Similarly, the
`attributes` section of a group can reference an imported attribute.

In the current semantic conventions specification, referencing a group is currently unsupported. Uniqueness within
groups is scoped by the type of group. It is entirely possible to have an event and a metric identified by the same ID.
Therefore, the following approach is proposed to reference a group:

```yaml
groups:
  - metric_ref: <reference_to_a_metric_group>
  - event_ref: <reference_to_an_event_group>

>   - span_ref: <reference_to_a_span_group>

Reviewer: we enforce group id uniqueness within otel registry and have a policy to ensure group ids look like `metric.{metric_name}`, `event.{event_name}`, etc  so I think we'd be fine with `ref:`

Author: Yes I agree. I updated the proposal.

  - ...
```

> Similar to attribute references, group references cannot override the type, stability, or deprecation status of the

Reviewer: I'd prefer to discuss it, maybe we can just say 

```suggestion
Similar to attribute references, group references would have limitations on what can be updated in scope of reference"
```

I can easily see that reference group is stable and something that overrides it is experimental - why not?

Author: Agree and applied.

imported group.

References to experimental entities across registries are allowed under certain conditions:

- An entity referencing an experimental entity must also be marked as experimental.

> - The flag `allow_experimental_ref` in the `weaver_registry.yaml` file must be set to `true`.

Reviewer: `allow_experimental_ref` - could we instead recommend (and include) a set of default policies to run when referencing things? I assume there will be tons of other policy-related things (charset, naming, deprecation/removal/back-compat, etc) that depend on the project needs and it'd be nice to make this configurable/expandable via a policy set rather than config options in the manifest
